Let’s delve into Per VLAN Spanning Tree (PVST+) and its rapid counterpart, Rapid PVST+. These protocols are essential for maintaining network stability and preventing loops in Ethernet networks. I’ll provide an overview and explain how to configure them.

Overview of PVST+ and Rapid PVST+
PVST+ (Per VLAN Spanning Tree Plus) creates a separate instance of the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) for each VLAN. In each instance, different processes occur, including the selection of a unique root bridge and the assignment of distinct port roles.
Rapid PVST+ is an improvement over the original STP standard (IEEE 802.1D). It implements the IEEE 802.1w standard (Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol, RSTP) on a per-VLAN basis. Rapid PVST+ allows faster convergence by enabling quicker adjustments to network topology changes.

Key Concepts:
Bridge ID and Priority:
Each switch has a unique Bridge ID, which consists of a priority value (default is 32768) and the switch’s MAC address.
The switch with the lowest Bridge ID becomes the root bridge for a specific VLAN.

BPDU (Bridge Protocol Data Unit):
BPDUs are messages exchanged between switches to determine the root bridge and maintain the spanning tree topology.
BPDUs contain information such as the sender’s Bridge ID, path cost, and port roles.

Port Roles:
Root Port: The port closest to the root bridge.
Designated Port: The port that forwards traffic toward the root bridge.
Blocked Port: The port that is disabled to prevent loops.

Path Cost:
The cumulative cost of traversing a path from a switch to the root bridge.
Calculated based on the link speed (e.g., Gigabit Ethernet has a lower cost than Fast Ethernet).

Configuration Steps:

Enable Rapid PVST+:
Rapid PVST+ is the default STP mode on most switches.
It operates per VLAN, allowing separate spanning trees for each VLAN.

Verify Configuration:
Confirm that Rapid PVST+ is active and functioning as expected.

Example Configuration (Cisco Nexus 5000 Series):

Enable Rapid PVST+:
switch(config)# spanning-tree mode rapid-pvst

Verify Configuration:
switch# show spanning-tree summary

Remember that PVST+ and Rapid PVST+ enhance network stability and reduce convergence time
